# What is this page?

I know it can be tricky to talk about ongoing work in a way that signals both its important contributions to date and the significant room for further development and improvement that undoubtedly exists. Here, I provide an example of how one might approach the white paper assignment, drawing on some of my own recent grant-funded research reporting. 

---

# FINANCING RESTORATION THEATER: WOMEN SHAREHOLDERS AND INVESTMENT NETWORKS, 1660-1700
Mattie Burkert, all rights reserved to the text on this page

## Project Summary/Abstract (1 paragraph) 
In 1642, amidst the chaos of civil war, London’s theaters shut their doors to the public. When they reopened in 1660, much about the playgoing experience changed. Proscenium arches created separation between the audience and the actors; elaborate sets transported viewers to faraway locales writers like Shakespeare had conjured entirely from words; and women, once legally barred from the public stage, played roles previously reserved for young men and even earned livings as successful playwrights. A robust body of scholarship has examined women’s growing influence as producers and consumers of drama in this period and the impacts of these developments on public life. But these histories have left out a key way that women participated in London’s entertainment industry: as its financial backers. My digital project will uncover female investors’ roles in building and upholding the financial infrastructure of the major playhouses, as well as the ways they made and leveraged social connections in this space. My website will combine digitized archival documents, transcripts, interactive network diagrams, and other data visualizations to advance new models of early modern society that center the forms of power and influence available to women.

## Project Origins and Goals
From the 1680s to the 1750s, women made up between 10 and 25% of shareholders in the major colonial trading companies and held between 17 and 34% of outstanding government annuities and bonds.  Economic historians have often assumed that most of these investors were widows and spinsters who inherited portfolios from male relatives and sat on them, collecting interest as income. Carlos and Neal, for example, identify numerous women who were active in the market during the 1720s—including a female stockbroker—but they still conclude that women were “somewhat more conservative” than men in their decision-making.  My research challenges narratives about early modern women as passive investors by shifting our attention away from joint-stocks like the East India Company and the South Sea Company and toward the market in theater shares as an important alternative sphere of economic exchange. As I argue in my recent book, the theaters were significant players in England’s transition to financial capitalism. The patents that allowed courtiers William Davenant and Thomas Killigrew to found the Duke’s and the King’s Company, respectively, transformed royal permission to perform drama into property that could be divided, traded, mortgaged, and leveraged as a security. Attending to this under-examined corner of London’s financial markets confirms that women actively purchased and traded playing company shares; furthermore, it reveals that the social capital attached to these investments may have had as much importance as the economic capital they represented.

This project will draw on Chancery Court records held in the U.K. National Archives in Kew, which I came across while researching my book in 2017. One lawsuit in particular—a 1704 case disputing the rightful ownership of shares in the Theatres Royal in Drury Lane and Dorset Garden—is suggestive of the ways that women investors entered this market. In her written testimony, defendant Anne Syderfin traces the history of the share she claims in William Davenant’s patent through eight other individuals who held portions of it at various points in time.  Syderfin did not inherit the assets from her deceased husband, but rather sought out shares for purchase. Her strategy does not appear to have yielded the anticipated gains, however; having spent £990 on the initial investment, she recalls receiving dividends totaling a bit over £66 between 1691 and 1694 and nothing after that. Her holdings were neither passive nor safe, contrary to standard assumptions about widowed investors in this period. 

Yet financial returns were not the only reason for investing: as Staves has shown, some women used their holdings in joint-stock companies to gain access to the male-dominated spaces and decision-making bodies of quasi-governmental financial institutions at a time when they could not even vote in Parliamentary elections.  What collateral benefits might there have been for an investor to retain ownership of playhouse shares that had not generated returns in a decade? In the suit, Syderfin states that “shee hath seene some few playes in the said Theatres in Drury Lane & Dorsett Garden not exceeding at most as she believes sixty without paying downe any money for the same & beleives sometimes tho seldom carryed a freind or two with her to see playes.” At four shillings for a box seat, seeing sixty plays would have cost about £12, a pittance compared to her up-front investment. The free admission alone could not have compensated her risk or the low rate of return, but the testimony suggests an additional social dimension to this perk: as a shareholder, Syderfin was able to treat not only herself but also her guests (“a freind or two”) to an evening’s entertainment. In a connected case, shareholder Alice Brownlow complains that she has received no dividends on her investments, while acknowledging that she has attended plays for free and even commanded a discount for associates in her absence.  Taken together, these testimonies suggest that some women maintained an interest in the playing companies, even when it was not financially profitable, in order to cultivate the social capital associated with being known as an investor in a dominant cultural institution. This insight complements and extends Staves’s argument about the political motivations of female shareholders in the joint-stock trading companies, expanding our understanding of early modern women’s strategies for hacking systems not designed to advance their interests. 

Using the archive of litigation surrounding the finances of the London theaters, I plan to diagram the movement of social capital against that of financial capital as shares changed hands. In recent years, digital historians have demonstrated that methods from network science can yield new insights into the social interconnectedness of the early modern world. I set out to analyze share transfers recorded in these testimonies, hoping to reveal the network of powerful individuals into whose proximity these women’s investments brought them. My hope was to uncover not only large-scale patterns, but also individual stories that would reveal how these women leveraged that access to cultivate influence -- contributing significantly to scholarly understandings of women’s power at the time. 


## Project Activities, Team, and Participants
From July to September 2022, I received support for my research from CAS and the Provost’s Office in the form of a Summer Stipend for Humanities and Creative Arts Faculty. I used a portion of the funds to hire a student assistant, Michele Pflug (PhD Candidate, History); the remainder helped to subsidize a three-week research trip to Ireland and the UK, where I gathered archival data, trained my research assistant, and met with international collaborators. 

I traveled from Eugene to Galway, Ireland on June 25 to attend a workshop for Theatronomics, an EU-funded digital humanities project for which I serve on the advisory board. Following the workshop, I traveled to Dublin, where I spend a day consulting rare books in the Trinity College library. I departed from Dublin to London, where I spent two days working with holdings in the British Library’s manuscript collections, eight days consulting materials in the U.K. National Archives, and an afternoon in the archives of the Garrick Club. I also identified further materials in the London Metropolitan Archives that I was unable to view during my visit, due to COVID-related constraints on the timing and duration of research appointments. Fortunately, Michele was able to call up many of these items after my departure and capture reference images of their contents on my behalf. 

Transcribing seventeenth- and eighteenth-century manuscripts is complex and time-consuming work, so I focused my limited time overseas on collecting photographs from which I could reconstruct the archival documents’ contents after my return. I took thousands of photographs representing close to 100 unique items (shelfmarks) held in the four institutions I visited. These items offer a deeper understanding of the activities of some of the seventeenth-century women I initially encountered through archival research in 2017, and they have also led me to identify a dozen new historical figures of interest. As noted above, historians have found that women represented anywhere from 10 to 25% of investors in major trading companies around the turn of the eighteenth century; an initial survey of the data I collected last summer suggests that women made up at least a quarter of the sharers in the playhouses during the same period, and that many of their stories have gone unnoticed or have been understood only partially to date.

## Project Outcomes
Once back in Eugene, Michele and I began testing out workflows for transcribing, encoding, tagging, and displaying the documents’ contents in a variety of digital formats. I set up a [GitHub repository for code and data sharing](https://github.com/mattieburkert/theater-sharers), as well as a directory on my UO webspace for image files that are too large to host in GitHub. In the coming weeks, we will begin importing documents from the GitHub repo into LEAF Writer, a new collaborative browser-based environment for editing TEI-compliant XML files of historical textual materials. I learned of LEAF Writer at the July 2022 Digital Humanities (virtual) conference and subsequently met with one of the project’s leaders, who provided me and Michele with advance access to and tutorials for using the platform. Because the platform is designed with both research and pedagogical applications in mind, I was able to use it to bring my own research project into my English 410: Digital Storytelling class in Winter 2023. Through the research I conducted in that context, I began to zero in on three specific protagonists whose legal battles offer the most concrete point of entry into the larger structures under examination. 

## Project Continuation and Long-Term Impact

I am continuing to transcribe and encode the subset of manuscripts related to my chosen protagonists, using the widely accepted TEI¬ markup language¬ to encode named entities such as people and locations. Transcription of the rest of the materials is a much larger task, one I am hoping to automate by training an AI handwriting recognition model using Transkribus. I am currently investigating the promise and limitations of this technology as it pertains to my dataset. 

Once the materials are transcribed and encoded, I plan to export node-link data a program like Gephi to generate network visualizations of the links created when shares were bought and sold, mortgaged and borrowed against, gifted, willed, or otherwise transferred between owners. In addition to diagramming the connections between people, I plan to produce quantitative measures of these relationships; for example, links between individuals might be weighted by the amount of money that changed hands, or a person’s centrality might be calculated based on their links to others. I will compose the project for publication using Scalar, a platform that hosts born-digital scholarly monographs and articles. Scalar’s seamless integration of text and multimedia elements with dynamic data visualizations will enable me to unfold my argument in writing alongside images and transcriptions of the relevant Chancery Court cases, datasets showing how I encoded the parties named in the testimonies, and network diagrams and metrics providing insight into their relationships. Through my website, users will be able to explore both the large and the small scale by tracing the movement of shares, visualizing the network of people involved, and viewing images and transcriptions of original documents that contextualize and humanize the data. I plan to submit the site for peer review by a journal like Cultural Analytics.

## Bibliography
- Burkert, Mattie. *Speculative Enterprise: Public Theaters and Financial Markets, 1688-1763.* University of Virginia Press, 2021. 
- Carlos, Ann M. and Larry Neal. “Women Investors in Early Capital Markets, 1720-1725.” *Financial History Review* 11.2 (2004).
- Froide, Amy M. *Silent Partners: Women as Public Investors During Britain’s Financial Revolution.* Oxford University Press, 2016.
- Laurence, Anne, Josephine Maltby and Janette Rutterford, editors. *Women and Their Money, 1700-1950: Essays on Women and Finance.* Routledge, 2009.
- Milhous, Judith and Robert D. Hume. "New Documents about the London Theatre 1685-1711." 8Harvard Library Bulletin* 36 (1988).
- Phipps, Teresa and Deborah Youngs, editors. *Litigating Women: Gender and Justice in Europe, c.1300-c.1800.* Routledge, 2022.
- “Smith v Syderfin,” 1704. U.K. National Archives, reference C8/597/28.
- “Smith v Lord Hervey,” 1704. U.K. National Archives, reference C8/599/74.
- Staves, Susan. “Investments, Votes, and Bribes,” in *Women Writers and the Early Modern British Political Tradition.* Cambridge University Press, 1998.




